people don't even know there's a house
here because it's like a hill and you
really can't see it unless you know
where the door is and stuff Kathy so
it's kind of integrated into the earth
right we call it earth integrated yeah
some people build a square box and they
shove it into a hill
but that's not really the same thing
like this is a whole different shape
right we call this house Earth
integrated rather than underground as
underground connotes dark and no lights
and this one is integrated into the
earth
[Music]
now it's like a birdcage
so you need it needs to be you know down
in a little bit so earth integrated
Paris integrated so it's kind of
integrated into the earth and as long as
it's you know twelve to fourteen inches
which is what the neck on all these
rulers are then it's below the frost
line so so well we took the top off a
hill and we built this house and then we
covered it up again hundred people up
there yes yeah the shape itself it's
like an eggshell you know you can't
break an egg huh it shan't break a whole
egg we're squeezing it so we're walking
on the roof yeah and you can look down
into all the rooms actually oh really
yeah so you are all skylights then these
are all skylights yes there's six
thousand acres here that were bought in
the 30s by a group of friends so we we
were expropriated we had to find
someplace to live my parents wanted to
invest in some property with a view so
my dad got topographical maps and he
followed the ridge because he figured on
the ridge this is like the last push of
the glacier it's called the terminal
moraine so he figured any place on the
ridge would have a good view my feet
aren't very hardened up yet and he said
oh you got to come and check this out
you can't afford it but it's amazing
just imagining the rest I mean this the
part I can see is beautiful
yeah these are big wind ventilators when
it's really windy they you know bring
fresh air into the house
well when we bought the property we
lived in a little Chalet that's just
down the driveway which is a prefab and
the only thing that got hot in the
winter was the hydrometer going around
and bill said we gotta get underground
is this the only place that has windows
exterior windows okay Kathy it's so cool
in here that's the point right like once
you're once you're below the frost line
which is just 12 to 14 inches it's a
constant temperature oh you know 58 59
degrees so it's it feels cool in the
summer and warm in the winter you only
have to heat that differential if it's
40 below it doesn't matter like this
room gets more exposure to outside but
these rooms are really this is where
your feet were yeah so this is where you
look down wow this feels so nice this
that's so rounded it feels so good yeah
it feels like you want to stand up
straight because it's it's not a box
right it's more cathedral-like or
whatever I mean it's just the feeling of
high-tech gives you and so light for
being underground well that was the
point we wanted to make sure that it was
you know not because people say you live
underground or dirt but it's the
building of course is made with what we
call feral concrete so the shell was
done in steel and then they put on this
expanded metal which is like not as wide
a space it's like a mesh and then
started blowing on concrete so the walls
are like 2 to 4 inches thick and then we
put this white powdered marble it's
natural marble you buy it as a powder as
a dust and put in that piece of in it
and then we travel that or the whole
thing so it's quite human essent but
also bright and you know you do get a
lot more light from above then from a
side window because that's where the Sun
in the sky is and these windows on the
side
getting bounced kind of reflected light
so it's the sky light is much more
effective than a side I yeah you do more
like for sure you know so it's not at
all dark in here in fact you know my
bedroom you can see through there is
darker because I've got a skylight cover
on it
we built all these domes and then put a
rubber membrane over the whole thing and
you do the work ourselves bill and the
kids basically and then here we had to
cut out the membrane to let light in I
mean you know we had good advisors
plumbers and you know because
everything's in the walls right it's not
like the heating system is in the floor
so it's warm floors in the winter so
it's radiant heat because it rises so
there's no blowers and fans and even
move it up higher if you want to do
trapeze so is it difficult to build it
around because you have it mean all the
furniture is just built in everything
has to be built in like you can't buy
anything right like these these the
bottom shelf is really deep and the top
shelf gets progressively narrower
because you're following the contour of
the wall you didn't want to put a square
fridge in here so he designed us
refrigerator which I mean refrigerators
have never been redesigned since the
icebox right there's still a box but
cold air is heavy and it sinks and every
time you open a fridge door the cold air
spills out and when you want the stuff
that's way at the back the fridge runs
for a long time after close the door to
get back to the temperature this way you
can lift up the contents and the cold
air stays down there the cold air is not
gonna be able to get up here now we're
we're getting a little bit of chill just
from the you know the crockery and stuff
but so it's a much more efficient
refrigeration actually and then of
course it's narrower he says so you can
find stuffs like oh I can find the
mayonnaise you guys are gone don't have
to get out on your hands and knees
traitor right so I always see see how
are you able to we get happened down its
pneumatic yeah he redesigned it with a
different kind of a drive like some kind
of a gear thing but this was the
prototype and this is what we have so
guess where the refrigerator is game
volume guess now right this push a
button step on leave her actually and
the fridge pops up that cool yeah and
you can feel it's cold and then if you
look down there well that that's the
cool like that the coils are around the
outside better Tabasco sauce leaked I
have to get my scooper in my department
so once everyday or depend how much you
use it the compressor just fills up with
here again to be able to lift the fridge
up it doesn't seem to ever frost up so
good like you defrost it this is what's
supposed to be the freezer but really
it's just garbage and then this is the
compost so you just you know make your
salad wash it here just compost finished
product and we had to think about
putting the chimney in here and you know
I had to think it all in it and then
this is what used to be the guest room
now Jordy my son is moving in here so
he's he's moved in a couple of car loads
already and there's a poster there of a
concept bill had it's a self-sufficient
living system with 36 housing units and
then there's one acre in the middle
that's communal but it's all covered so
in the Arctic it's perfect this is a
little dining dome we have to that's you
know he had a concept to make these
buildings you need to get a building
permit for anything over 100 square feet
so this is just exactly 100 square feet
or a 99 point whatever nothing square
anyway it's all around so this is
another dining area that we have that's
it's all screened in but it's you know
around tables nice because everybody can
talk to each other and
can pass the food around easily so if
you want it to be outdoors or it's only
for summer yeah yeah it's not usable in
the winter I love this you do manage to
find a rounded couch and that's can't be
easy actually usually both of those
halves are facing the little fireplace
in the winter and that fireplace is so
great because it gets like blue with
this really really you just emanates
heat around the fireplace you never
remember nice so this is like the main
living room when I realized that we
weren't gonna travel the winter that he
died I suggested we put a fireplace in
here I can't take it down in the summer
we need the space for a big dance or
something but it just clicks out and
then we have a big fireplace out here so
this is like the equivalent to the front
entranceway so it does have windows that
look out but it's also we can block it
off in the winter if we you know
Christmas when people are coming we'll
get the fire going in here and but if we
don't have to heat it then it just saves
a bunch of energy because that's plenty
of living space on the other side yeah I
just closed that big door yeah right I
mean you know that wall is and in behind
here is but this is certainly more open
you can see it so it's another dining go
how does the house behave all along the
years so is he able to give you comfort
no matter what whether you have outside
yeah if it's you know if there's a big
storm or anything we don't you know the
only thing is if we get a big snowfall
and then it gets warm sometimes the snow
will stick on the skylights but very
rarely because it's it just blows off
right but you don't mind you miss having
conventional windows or something that
you come here and no I mean actually
from every room in the house except the
bathroom you can see outside I mean
there's my bedroom I can lie in there
that's a glass door I can
look out if those blinds are drawn so we
can see outside from every room is this
a little bit like a summer well it's the
dining room this is the major dining
room at Christmas we turn up and put on
the fireplace and warm it up and you
know people sleep on the couches cuz
there's room to sleep lots of people
here this is the only room that we do
have an air conditioner if it gets
really super hot like when my dad stayed
with us one summer he was just
complaining so we put in this air
conditioner it would close off all these
blinds close that door we can put the
air conditioner on and then it will get
cooler than the other rooms we had a
little fashion show up my party of old
stuff I'd made so I work with four it's
knitted and it makes a fabric that has
firmed both sides when you knit it right
I mean I was raised in Labrador in Goose
Bay where it's cold and people wear fur
next to their skin so when I saw a lady
with a fur coat with a fur on the
outside I said to my brother at least
get a coat on inside out and I started
knitting with leather like this is
knitted leather mostly I work with
beaver I'm a beaver weaver because it's
very Canadian I did a lot of export in
the time that I was really active in the
fur trade use what you got right
renewable resource and beaver is a
rodent there's plenty of Beaver around
and it is the softest so let me just
show you this range shawl and I won the
Canadian women Entrepreneur of the Year
award in 1995 for international
competitiveness because we brought so
much money into the country this is
crocheted it's called a hands-free shawl
so it's like a shawl right you put it on
you can do whatever you're doing wash
dishes drive the car and it keeps you
really warm and you can turn it into a
big shawl collar and a coat or you can
make it into a skinny scarf you know it
can be a hood just wear like a big
accessory piece how cool does it get
here we're in Celsius so I don't know -
20 - 25 Celsius so that's pretty cold
but inside here it's yeah you just close
that door and you know I mean there is
heat in the floors as I explained so
it's a radiant heat so
it's very nice it's just the big
bathroom he said I didn't know how
bigger was gonna be he was drawing
circles on a piece of paper so we do
have like all of the negative spaces he
was gonna fill them in with gravel for
you know to make it more solid I mean
are you kidding where am I gonna put all
my towels so all these negative spaces
now you know in between all these domes
so they've all got weird shaped walls
and everything but it's perfect for you
know storing stuff was the shower just
bolted in yeah and the bathtub too
really and all these cupboards right so
we just shaped it in wire and set the
table in and then covered it with
expanded metal and some concrete and
Nadiya marble do you need can you repair
you can't hurt him we do have like where
the light is it's hotter so it gathers
dust like that's really the biggest
problem right so once a year we go
through around with some tsp and scrub
where the lights are you can't chip it
you know you can't put your fist through
it like you could through gyproc you
definitely break your fist and then
there's another bedroom in here if we
have two mattresses here so we can pull
one down depends on that how many people
show up to sleep over or so yeah he's
just gonna carved into the walls
yeah the cupboards you know the little
closet they're taken out of the space no
the two boys who helped build it grew up
in the chalet we lived there and then
Carmen came quite a bit later she's 11
years younger than the eldest so she
grew up here this was her room but you
know at the time that we moved in here
the boys were teenagers they're just a
couple years apart so we left them in
the chalet
so they were perfectly happy though that
worked out quite well for them
they were happy and then we have the
swing it's just totally adjustable right
so you can yeah so this is a pretty big
space the thing is you know the
temperature like we don't do anything in
the summer as I said we have that room
that we can cool down but 31 degrees out
and it feels really nice in here yeah
it's like a basement right look at my
daughter's house they sleep in the
basement cuz it's so cool in the summer
and you go upstairs and it's like oh man
it's hot but this is really a basement
because you know our feet were up there
right so it's it's all integrated into
the earth and the earth is once you're
below that 12 to 14 inches it stays cool
and and in the winter how much you
heating well not much we only have to
heat up you know maybe 16 18 degrees and
of course there's no drafts like that's
where you lose a lot of heat in houses
is through drafty windows and vents and
things coming in so there's nothing and
it also feels really nice there's
something cathedral-like about the shape
right it's not it's not over your head
it makes you want to stand up taller the
white was important probably right well
yeah because it's very reflective and a
white card you know light colored
carpets and yeah we wanted it to be you
know to be bright we feel helped because
there are no lights on no no no you have
much more natural light from the sky if
you have a window here you're just
getting bounced light right because Sun
shines down in so you're getting
reflected like more whereas the skylight
you're getting pure light that's with
these circles you can you can watch them
fall follow them around during the day
because as the Sun moves out of the
circles there's a certain time of day
you can't watch TV because it's got the
circles on it Cassie come on everybody
doesn't want you to jump on them all the
time no they don't I never thought about
sky lights only would be enough oh yeah
but it really is yeah it's caves but
it's bright caves you think of as dark
but it's shelters you in such a way
there he's for you it's like going back
to the womb so your husband also did a
lot of work with airplanes well he is
most famous actually for flying with
birds they made a movie about it
Columbia Pictures called fly way home he
flies ultralights he got lonely so he
trained some birds to fly with him and
then he thought I'll take him on
migration so it's little across the lake
Canada geese right and then scientists
approached him and said you know there's
problems with whooping crane the
whooping crane is hiding endangered and
they used to be have an easterly
migrating flock and so he wanted to
reestablish the easterly migrating flock
of the whooping cranes he was only a
Nardo I mean the man could build
anything fly anything derive anything
build anything I mean he built this
house and he built all kinds of things
in his career at one point he got all
inspired me built a slight size replica
of a lunar module he just wanted to
build it cuz you know man I just landed
on the moon and so we went to the bank
and borrowed money to buy build a life
scale replica of the lunar module yeah
we were gonna make a little guest suite
out of it you know and I was earning
lots of money I mean my business was
really taking off because it was new I
mean I really changed the whole fur
trade so and it was great you know we
were a great team I got to work in the
soft stuff and he's out there hammering
metal in the anvil and you know so we
were for a good contrast this big tower
was one of the themed sculptures for
Expo 86 it was transportation the one in
Vancouver this was the land
transportation Plaza yeah so this is the
self-portrait that was done for the IMAX
movie good old bill he's supposed to
look up in shock
hmm and the in the house is just covered
in wildflowers yeah there's lots of
grapes on the top and you don't see the
home from this side at all no not even
that no just you can see the ventilator
there but this is the chalet this is
where we this was on the property when
we first bought it and we lived here
with the two boys and then we built that
house how this is Cadence's painting on
my oil tank bills father goose that
people know about him flying with the
geese and I'm the beaver Weaver is my
first shop okay yeah so it's just a
short walk to work now that's great at
one point we tried to put gardens up
there but you know I got enough
gardening already lots of vetch and and
actually I harvest the grapes on the
roof and make jelly in the ball yeah and
then there's a door here so you know if
I'm working in the garden I can sleep
right in here and go to the bathroom is
that taking my boots off well I have a
pretty big vegetable garden this is
really this is cool because it doesn't
leave a scar like you know a little
lower smaller so this is the temperature
if there was nothing right yeah we do
have to have square stuff so we hide it
in this room washer/dryer finding having
it yep
back up fridge freezer
[Music]
all around is the base it's called Earth
integrated there is no basement it's all
basement if you want to look at it that
way we call it earth integrated yeah do
you guys want name water or nuts and
then rin ago it's just the feeling of
this different shape getting out of the
box and really you know the advantages
in this country where the temperature
can vary you know easily a hundred
degrees fahrenheit from the hottest day
to the coldest day and but once you're
below the frost line this constant
temperature and it's very easy to deal
with it's easy to bring it up if you
don't lose any heat from drafts and then
the summer you don't have to do anything
just enjoy it
[Music]